Symbolic math for ruby.

== Installation

gem install symbolic

== Introduction

This gem can help you
- if you want to get a simplified form of a big equation
- if you want to speed up similar calculations
- if you need an abstraction layer for math

Symbolic doesn't have any external dependencies.

== Tutorial

First, you need to create a symbolic variable.

  x = var

  # you can set a name of variable (useful if you print equations)
  angle = var :name => 'θ'

  # or starting value
  pi = var :value => 3.14

  # or bind its value to a proc
  y = var { x ** 2 }

  # you can set a value for already created variable
  x.value = 3

Now, you can do any math operations with it.

  f = 2*x + 1
  puts f # => 2*x+1

To get value of symbolic expression you just call value:

  f.value # => 7

You can accomplish the same thing with subs:

  f.subs(x,3) # => 7

Or make a more complicated substitution:

  f.subs(x,x**2) # => 2*x**2+1

If symbolic expression contains variables without value then it returns nil.

  z = var
  (z+1).value # => nil

All symbolic expression are automatically simplified when created:

  0 * x           # => 0
  2 + x + 1       # => x + 3
  -(x-y) + 2*x    # => x + y
  (x**2)**3 / x   # => x**5
  # etc. (more examples can be found in symbolic_spec.rb)

If you need to use a function from Math module with symbolic variable, use Symbolic::Math module.

  cos = Symbolic::Math.cos(x)
  x.value = 0
  cos.value # => 1.0

You can get a list of variables from symbolic expression:

  (x+y+1).variables # => [x, y]

So you can get a list of variables without value:

  (x+y+1).variables.select {|var| var.value.nil? }

You can get information about the number of different operations used in a symbolic expression:

  f = (2*x-y+2)*x-2**(x*y)
  f.operations # => {"+"=>1, "-"=>2, "*"=>3, "/"=>0, "**"=>1, "-@"=>0}

You can also take derivitives and do taylor expansions:

  Symbolic::Math.cos(x**2).diff(x)
  # => -2*(sin(x**2))*x
  Symbolic::Math.cos(x).taylor(x,0,3)
  # => -0.5*x**2+1.0


== TODO
- a lot of refactoring (code is pretty messy at this stage)
- plotting capabilities
- integrals
- thorough documentation

== Author

brainopia (ravwar at gmail.com).

I am ready to help with any questions related to Symbolic.
I welcome any contribution.